We had
specific rules of engagement in which we were,
let's say, restricted against certain types of
targets and against certain types of tactics
fighting. You probably don't know that a fighter
pilot flying over North Vietnam in war could not
shoot down a North Vietnamese transport airplane
that had North Vietnamese markings on it. He was
told categorically, you cannot shoot that
airplane down. We couldn't hit certain targets.
Get back to my subject. Really, really, actually,
we, the rules of engagement, read them
specifically, you could not attack and fire at a
North Vietnamese fighter unless it threatened
you. Now, that's the fact. Are you kidding? That's
the fact. That a fighter? That a fighter. Jeez.
That must have done wonders. Really, really,
really, we ignored this. And, of course, you could
see a fighter over there. He was attacked. How
could anybody prove that he wasn't a threat to you?
Of course, you couldn't enforce that. But the
transport, you may have been diplomats in it. Who
knows? Getting back to the dam, you couldn't bust
these dams. That would turn the water loose in
North Vietnam and destroy the countryside. We
didn't want to do that. I'm saying it's very
sarcastic. But the power, the powerhouse at that
dam, it produced electricity. We all tried to hit
that. But being about knowing how hydroelectric
plants are with respect to dam, right adjacent to
the dam, particularly the influx of water going
down the chute, maybe 10 feet from the dam on the
water side. But how are you going to drop a lot of
bombs and hit that without hitting the dam? But we
couldn't do that until we got the laser-guided
bombs. And I've actually seen pictures brought
back where a laser-guided bomb was dropped two or
three up and hit right in the funnel, 10-foot
diameter funnel, of this hydroelectric plant and
never even touched the dam. That's how hateful it
was. I've seen bombs go through the roof of
powerhouses right in the middle of Hanoi. We've
got pictures of it. That was
produced with Texas Instruments, and I'm proud to
say that I was instrumental in getting that into
the Air Force. And when did we get the laser bomb?
Just about the time I left. You mean in the
Porsches? Yeah. Just about the time I came home in
1967. So
that was a great improvement.
Well, we've raised a lot of questions about this.
We were talking about problems. We were talking
about morale, and we were talking about some of the
problems, and morale seems to be a major problem.
Well, it wasn't a real major problem. It was one of
the problems. It was one of the problems, and how
did you attempt to solve that problem? It seems
like it's a dilemma. Improve our tactics and
issues, and we did, and we cut down lost colonies at
one time. One of the...
It's ironic to say it, but one of the best ways we
improved the morale of the boys over there was
toward the end of the war when we finally got
instructions above to bring the B-52s in and
really bomb the place. And you recall we did that.
And, you know, we lost one or two B-52s, sure. But in
that massive, up-to-date, drowned environment
of modern SAM missiles, we sent formation of the
B-52s over and lost practically none. A few, yeah.
But look at the effect of that bombing. Had we done
this initially in the war, that war wouldn't have
lasted six months. Now why would a carpet bombing
of the B-52 versus your bombing from your fighters
Why do you say that that was more effective, and why
couldn't they, why couldn't the SAM missiles hit
those 52s like they could hit you? Well, first,
let's be sure we understand when you say carpet
bombing. When I say carpet bombing, I'm talking
about the use of the B-52s against Viet Cong in
South Vietnam. Right, in the Ho Chi Minh Trail.
Yeah, and this was... Well, let's talk about...
Now, the pinpoint bombing against targets by the
B-52s And North Vietnam was the same as the
pinpoint bombing of the fighters, except, you
know- Was it laser too? No, not B-52. It was just
plain old B-52 bomb system bombing by radar or
actual visual bombing. Normal capability of B-52
as it is today to bomb. They don't have the
capability of laser bombs on a B-52? Is it out of
range or what? No. Matter of fact, while I was at TI,
I brought this up, and I'm proud of the fact that we
built a system to make a B-52 a smart bomber. A smart
bomber, in other words, a laser-guided bomb, and
built equipment to put a B-52 to do the same thing.
It's just a matter of putting a laser on one of the
aircraft so that he can mark the target with the
same B-52, if you will, or another B-52 dropping
laser-guided bomb. The laser-guided bomb has to
be It was a special-equipped bomb with a laser
homer on it. Yeah, right. Only built at TM. Okay, so
we had it on the fighters, but we didn't have it on
the B-52s. No, that's right. Okay. Now, why did we
lose so many fighters over North Vietnam versus
why did we not lose so many B-52s? Well, why were the
SAMs more effective against the fighters versus
the B-52s? Well, because of the fact that the
fighters were the ones that were doing the bombing
when the SAMs were first brought in and had to
experience and learn and stomach this type of
aerial warfare
initially. We weren't using BPIC-2s at that time.
We weren't authorized to use them. And through the
experience of the fighters going through this, if
you will, learning curve of tactics and
techniques, and new technology and evasive
action. Electronics. We knew all of this before we
ever threw the B-52s in, and we knew how to suppress
the sounds. That's the reason we didn't use any
B-52s. We used ECM.
And we go back to a famous statement by General
LeMay, the bomber will always be able to get
through to hit its target. Well, this is true,
but... Under what conditions and how many losses
are you going to accept? Sure. In other words, and
correct me if I'm wrong, we would have started out
with the bombings of the B-52s. Instead of
starting out with the fighters, we would have lost
a lot of B-52s initially in 66 and 67. You bet your
boots. Because we learned new tactics from the
fighters in 66 and 67 before we threw the B-52s
around 1970 at them. Okay. Definitely. Okay.
Good. Great. Now, let's get back to morale. Were
there other ways that we tried to boost the morale
of the pilots? Other ways, like R&R? Oh, man. We
built some of the finest facilities for the pilots
you could ever imagine. Tell me about it. The staff
that would come on visits from Washington were
experienced TAC commanders. Matter of fact,
General Dissway,
commanding, well, General Dissway was very
experienced in tactical. The Tactical Air Force
was back home. Would come over and see our
facilities in Thailand for living, where the
pilots lived, barracks. Actually, if you will,
little cottages almost. The maintenance
facilities for the aircraft, air conditioning.
Beautiful equipment and all. Top notch stuff. And
top notch, the cream of the crop. Airmen, you know,
polished it, were sent over there to fight the war,
rightfully so. Gee, I don't even have this at home.
So it was, and particularly, we even built a golf
course, one of the basics. No kidding. It was a
modified golf course, but even built one of those.
That's again, Jim Wilson. So really, I'm
overdoing the morale. It wasn't, it was a problem.
And had we not done a lot of these things, it could
have gotten worse. I assure you this, we couldn't
afford to keep losing aircraft like that. We had to
do some. But here again, and I give General Momar
and some of the previous commanders full credit,
as well as the wing commanders, you know, it's a
matter of staff people, planners, and
operational people getting together and making
decisions on how we would, you know, revised
tactics and all.
Any administrative problem with respect to the
Thai Air Force or any, let's say, political
problems in Thailand, now that is where I really
came into the act at one of my functions, and
objective and problem. Let's get to that in just a
minute. I want to talk about the morale as far as
enlisted men for the two years that you were there.
How was the morale as far as enlisted? Great. We
took care of the enlisted men the same way. And you
know, as soon as you bring this question up, and
I'll tell you right now, when I was there in
Thailand in 1966 and 67,
I don't remember I don't remember in my staff
meetings, my personnel, staff man, ever bringing
up the problem of drugs and marijuana. I don't
remember this at all. Now, this is in Thailand.
See, we didn't have Viet Cong that might come in and
cover a base at night. So the morale of our boys, it
was a considerably easier situation living in
Thailand than it was in South Vietnam at an air
base. Was there any security problems where you
ever attacked? Never. And the Thai Air Forces, by
the way, was at each base. They were responsible
for your security. They were responsible for base
defense. Now, we did have a few, much evidence in
North, around Udorn and Ubon, North and East
Thailand, and particularly Nakhon Phanom, where
there was evidence of, let's say, Pathet Lao,
Laotian, which would count, you know, tantamount
to Viet Cong.
making probe attempts to enter the base, but I
don't recall ever an attack on a base in Thailand.
None like there were in South Vietnam. And there
was never an American airman or pilot shot at or
shot, killed in Thailand, to your memory? No. Not
from a standpoint of warfare, no. OK. And no drugs.
That is surprising. As a matter of fact, when I, you
know, subsequent to being out of service and back
home and seeing, reading what I did, I just don't
recall any having any problems like that. If they
were, they were never brought to my attention, but
certainly not on a scale that I have since read
about in South Vietnam. But it's different, and
you know, the poor old army, the life they lived in
the jungles in South Vietnam, that must have been
horrible. Now, before we get to the relations that
you had with the Thais on a high level, let's talk
about the relations that your junior officers and
your enlisted men had with the Thais just going out
to base on liberty. Oh, no. No problem. No problem.
There was, to answer your question, really no
problem at that level. No. How long have you been
with that water code? Do you want me to change
anything? Turn it off. Turn it off. The real
problem was, let's say, the economic effect on the
country of Thailand that the political levels,
the administrations of Thailand, was confronted
with. The influx of money. Thais worked in support
roles on the base and then having more money than
you take a stick at, unusual. They go back home. And
then, naturally, it's developed a black market
type of an operation with PX supplies and this type
of a thing. And inflation. And inflation, oh yeah.
And it had an impact, see. The Thai people weren't
used to this type of thing. For instance, we had to
build barracks and had to build them fast at Udorn.
Well, we just put out a... We didn't have the
American forces to do that. Use a saw and hammer. So
we put out an advertisement in Udorn. Show up at the
gate tomorrow morning with a saw and hammer and
we'd hire you as a carpenter. Rice growers that
couldn't even saw would show up with a brand new saw
and a brand new hammer at the gate. We hired them. In
48 hours, we trained him as a carpenter, and he did
well. Did they? That type of thing. Did they have
more hard workers? Oh, yeah. The people of the
street, they loved it. They had no problem
whatsoever. Of course, you had prostitution, but
you had that throughout the world. That was no
problem. Venereal disease really was not too
great a problem. The medical problems, by the way,
were not great. We had no real medical problems.
Clean. Clean. Well, we kept it clean. Yeah. And I
give General Wolfe a full credit for it. Boy, he was
a monster when it came to uncleanliness. And when
you hired these people to come in and build your
base, you had American supervisors, of course.
Oh, yeah. They just nailed away. Oh, yeah. Oh,
yeah. What did you pay them? Did you pay them a lot
more than they could make? No, no, see that's one of
the things that was coordinated at the political
level. You couldn't go much above what the going
rate was, otherwise it cost such enough people,
but still it was more money than they'd ever seen
before. Do you remember about how much it was a day?
No, no I don't. All I know is it was carefully
figured
and controlled. Okay, so for the two years you were
in there, it sounds like enlisted morale was high.
Oh, with no real problem. Okay. Now let's talk
about a headache that you had, or a challenge
anyway, and that is the relations with the Thai
officials. Well, if I had a problem, in other
words.
I thought you said that you had some problems as far
as relations with Tide, which was another part of
your duties and functions. The economic problem
and political problem is one of the things I just
described here. It wasn't an insurmountable and
great problem, but it was one of the problems that
required my attention. So what about the politics
of dealing with the king, the queen, and other high
military officials? I had to keep Air Marshal
Boonshue, the Chief of Staff. How do you spell
that? I'll correct it. It's almost the way it
sounds. B-O-U-N-C-H-O-U something, G-G
something like that. In a lot of these things, I
suggest, well, in your history, you probably want
to spell it accurately, and I'll try it. I think in
my papers I have the exact spelling. You'll find
something. Because that would be impossible for
my gal to spell these words. Oh, yeah. But I'd keep
him informed of our, if we brought in some
additional replacements or aircraft, I'd keep
him informed. And a lot of times, by the way I did
this, I would do it through what we called the
American MAG Forces, Military Assistance Group,
which was stationed right in Bangkok. And their
primary mission was to support and train the Thai
Air Forces. And many times, me being up at Udorn,
I'd just get on the phone and call the colonel
heading up that group and tell him about this
problem. And since he was dealing daily across the
board with the Thai Air Force staff, he could
really handle this problem easily for me. It was
only major things where I'd have to take a trip down
to Thailand and maybe even get with the ambassador
that would require my attention to go across maybe
to the ambassador to talk with somebody at the Thai
governmental level, like the prime minister,
maybe Air Marshal Da Wee or somebody like that. An
example maybe, huh? What would it be? Let me see.
Oh, yes. The at the high, of course, international
diplomatic level, Thailand trying to play their
cards as carefully as possible and not get North
Vietnamese invading Thailand, they would never
admit openly, publicly, that American aircraft
were operating on Thai bases. Everybody in the
world knew this, but they could not openly admit
this to the media, the correspondents. And
correspondents were always trying to get them to
admit this. And even though correspondents could
see them flying home? Well, correspondents
weren't, uh, they were controlled pretty well
through, uh, throughout bases of Thailand, they
were pretty well restricted to Bangkok, and you
know, making the inquiries right there in
Bangkok. I guess I've seen, I guess during my
fifteen months over there, or eighteen months, I
guess I saw in brief correspondence at my air base
in Udon, maybe twice. And once, when we finally
agreed, and here again was a careful coordination
with the Thais, it wasn't a problem, but it was
solving a problem. Money Thailand was going to
announce, I agree, announce publicly that the
American players were operating from their base.
We had a big, open meeting with the correspondents
at Tockley, up in Corotta, Tockley, Tockley. And I
got up and, you know, officially announced it. And
the problem went away then. The media, I just want
to be able to say it. They weren't bugged after
that. Do you call that a problem? Really not. It's
just something that had to be lived with. Whenever
the king and queen made an official visit
throughout Thailand, let's say in the upper
reaches of Thailand to the hinterland,
particularly during the months of the heavy
flooding of the Kong River, they wanted to show up
to boost the morale of the people. I would provide
helicopters for them. With American or tied
insignia? American helicopters and American
insignia. No kidding. And they'd fly them out and
they wouldn't change the insignia? See, we had
some helicopter portraits of our own anyhow, but
so did the Ties. But a Tied King would fly in a
foreign helicopter? Sure, there's no problem
about that. Well, I mean, he wouldn't even change
the insignia. No, no. I'd say, see, I'd fly him out
of Udorn, maybe 20, 30 miles north up along the
banks of the Mekong River, still in Thailand, and
land in the, let's say, in a little island in the
middle of the flooded area where a lot of the people
have congregated. Then he'd get out and walk among
the people and bow and scrape and show reverence.
And, oh, this was a great thing. And then he'd get
back in the airplane and bring it back to Udorn.
There was never even talk about insignia on the
airport. The people were just happy to see their
royalty. That's right. In Thailand, number one is
religion. Number two is the king and queen. Number
three is, well, what else?
The king and queen are very important. You know,
you realize a lot of coups in Thailand, but the king
and queen are always there. And Thailand is always
there. But it's the lower structure that has
changed. and most of the time it's pretty well
infused with military people. Surprisingly,
Thailand has survived through the Japanese
invasion. It's still intact and so forth. Okay, so
back to the relations with the Thais. How about
just working with the Thailanis? How about just
working with the people? The military people?
Yeah. How were relations between American
generals and Thai generals? Excellent.
Excellent. Matter of fact, we have a healthy
respect for one another, and I was proud of this.
The comments about the capabilities is another
thing. Let's talk about that later on, the
military capabilities. But our relations with
them was terrific. Their morale was great. we
really had a healthy respect for one another. I
think in a lot of cases the Thai Air Force officers
were delighted that this vast American bomber
machine was operating their bases. Look at the
experience they were getting just watching this.
Look at the experience they were getting. One of
the, wasn't really a problem, but it was something
I had to carefully monitor and be very careful
about was the so-called air defense of Thailand.
See here where the American forces on these bases
in Thailand and
for all practical purposes the Thais didn't have
any air defense. They had a few F-86s
which were really air defense type aircraft but
very few But here we had all these F-4s and F-105s.
And let's say that the North Vietnamese suddenly
maybe wanted to attack in our base in Thailand. Who
would defend against this? Well, the Thais knew we
had a better capability. As a matter of fact, we
were operating with key radars. for, you know,
controlling the oil. No kidding? You were
operating their radars? No. You were operating
the key radars on the base? The key radar sites.
Yeah, on the bases. On the bases, but eventually we
turned them over to the Thais and the Thais were
operating them. Because really we didn't fear an
air defense tactical situation in Thailand. to a
great extent, didn't fear an air defense tactical
situation in South Vietnam. It was a matter of, you
know, the North Vietnamese forces had an air
defense force. But there were some helicopter
operations every once in a while across the river
from Laos into Thailand, and we'd pick them up on a
radar, and naturally we had to scramble something
to intercept them. Most of this was at night. I
think, looking back now, that a lot of this was
plain smuggling. by
who knows, whether it was the Pathet Lao, or Viet
Cong, or North Vietnamese, or maybe even Thais
smuggling gold, or marijuana, or what have you,
dope across from Laos to Thailand. But I remember
talking to Marshal Boonshue to coordinate and get
it understood that and actually on paper and meet
General, get General Momar's approval of my
responsibilities in Thailand for air defense.
Now, I reported to General Momar tactically, so I
had to be responsible for air defense of our
American forces in Thailand at these Thai air
bases, and that's the reason I had a control center
in my headquarters, an air defense control
center, really a tactical air control center.
What was the plan? The North, let's say the North
Vietnamese sent over a few MiGs to hit out one of
your air bases. What was the plan? Who would
scramble? The Americans or the Thais or both? No, I
would. How did it work? I would. I'd scramble. This
is one of the things that I resolved with Air
Marshal Boonshue. He gave, Air Marshal Boonshue
actually gave me authority. And orally, he told me
one time, you have authority to shoot these
aircraft down if you want to. And I asked him to give
me this in writing, and he wouldn't do it. But if it
came to that problem, I don't think I was worried
about any such thing as that. As a matter of fact, on
two occasions, on two occasions, we picked up a
blip on our radar right there at Udorn in the
northern ridges of Thailand, and I had no, see we
got We knew air traffic. We'd given this from
Seventh Air Force. We knew if there was going to be
any tactical airplanes in the area. Matter of
fact, we would drive the room where the bombers
right over were going on the way up. We picked up
this, I was called out of bed about 2 o'clock in the
morning and rushed down to the control center and
getting in. Actually, I went over to the radar
site, which is right on the same bay, and saw the
blip. And I got in my control center and I let some of
the Air Force know immediately, personally, is
there anything there? No, sir, we don't have
anything. Well, that blip went right straight
over the top of Udorn. Of course, we were attacked.
Went right on down, disappeared to the south. And
on over south. So you didn't scramble? No. Well, we
scrambled. No, we didn't scramble. Why not? We
didn't have any fighters right at Udorn. But I was
prepared to tell Korat and Takli to travel to that
floor if necessary. Now later on, we did get- And
you never found out what this month was? No, but I'm
convinced what it was. It could have been a high
altitude SR-71 or U-2 on reconnaissance that we
didn't even know about. Maybe even Seventh Air
Force didn't even know about it. I don't know. It
was way out there though.
But later on, you said. But later on, we got a little
bit concerned about such situations. So we
actually had two F-102s stationed at Udorn on air
defense alert, strictly an air defense
operation. And this element came out of a F-102
interceptor squadron over at Philippines Clark
Air Force Base. And of course, I monitored their
operation. To my knowledge, I We may have
scrambled those guys maybe once or twice against a
suspected attack, either night or day during a
time of the war, maybe once or twice.
Now, what were the TIE capabilities? It sounds
like we've covered relations with the TIE. It
sounds great. What about the capabilities of
their Air Force and their military in general? I'd
say the capabilities of the entire Air Force was
typical of those small countries in the Far East.
Their equipment was, you know, definitely
obsolete. We finally gave them, just about time I
left, we programmed two or three F-5, modern
fighter, if you will, two or three. Now they had
three or four squadrons of jet aircraft, F-86
type. By that time, it was obsolete. And some
little T-26s, which was nothing more but a
prop-driven trainer airplane. But their mission
really was, I mean, the equipment in our MAG,
Military Assistance Group, function, which was
done in Thailand, I mean, Bangkok, which wasn't
under me. It went straight to, you know, back to the
USF headquarters, but coordinated with me. Their
mission, of course, was to train and equip the Thai
Air Force in accordance with really what their
threat was. Well, really the only threat at that
time in Thailand was insurrection, possibly
spilling of the Pathit Lao bit-kong, if you will,
Lao's type bit-kong, Pathit Lao, the bad guy, if
you will, spilling across the river and causing
trouble in Thailand. Thailand amongst the
natives, and maybe even sabotaging roads, and
particularly against the Thai police. The Thai
police were greatly involved in security
throughout Thailand. It was always a matter of
whether the Thai army was going to do it, whether
the Thai police was going to do it. And actually, we
equipped the Thai police, you might call them
national police, with helicopters. But they
didn't have any problems as far as that when you
were there, as far as insurgency. Oh, yes, sir. As a
matter of fact, my coordination with the Thais was
primarily at the base level, and that's where the
Thai base commander and the American base
commander coordinated their relations with one
another, particularly on any possible security
measures or security threats. Now, the main place
we had this problem was at my base at Udorn and at
Mekong Phnom, way over by the Mekong River in
extreme, well around the Mekong River on the
border of Laos and Thailand and northeastern part
of the country. Actually, there was constant
jungle battles between suspected North
Vietnamese communists, if you will,
insurrectionists, and the Thai police, the Thai
army, continually. And there was ambushes and
all. Much like what the South Vietnamese and the
United States Army was involved in in South
Vietnam. But not definitely, definitely not on
that scale. There was even some possibility we
wondered about up northern, in extreme northern
Thailand, of maybe Chinese infiltration. But we
never could prove that.
So you equipped the Thai police with helicopters?
Yep. The United States Air Force. Sure. One of
Ambassador Graham's primary objectives at the
time I was over there was to, I think, get around 10
or 15 helicopters for the Thai Air Forces. He
eventually succeeded, but And this gets into
another interesting area between McNamara.
We'll get to that. OK. It sounds to me that we've
done a fairly good job on the relations with the
tithes, morale, your functions and duties. Is
there any other types of duties that you were
involved with? Yes. One of them ought to be brought
out and can be brought out now.
There were some very specious at that time and
highly classified operations being carried out
in Laos and as
ironic as it sounds and as unusual as it might sound
to you and just can't understand it, there was a
so-called Air America outfit on Udorn Air Force
Base, right in my headquarters. Those people were
really controlled and, if you will, managed and
directed really by the American Ambassador of
Laos at that time, Ambassador Sullivan. But there
they were at Udorn Air Force Base in Thailand. How
did I fit into that? Finally, I got through
Ambassador Sullivan. I actually made trips
across the river to his, to his embassy at times.
And frankly, in a way, there was no charter for me
there. I just liked General McConnell told me to
use your head, and I developed a very close rapport
with Ambassador Sullivan, and I liked him I assure
you, I assure you, that he was not like the Seventh
Air Force. From General Momar right on down. He was
not liked by them? Not liked. As a matter of fact,
General Momar made a special trip up to my
headquarters and to talk to Ambassador Sullivan.
At my suggestion, look, you two guys better get
together. I realized what the problem was. But
Ambassador Sullivan was operating, in effect,
Let's put it out on the table. CIA forces as Air
America. General Mollmeyer had nothing to do with
this. But General Mollmeyer objected to this.
Here's one air power commander over there, and I'm
sure that Spike is his nickname. I'm sure he went to
USAAF headquarters through channels to talk
about this, as well as the Navy problem,
controlling Navy air, you know, Navy strikes
against North Vietnam to coordinate the air. But
he never got the first base on me. And I agree with
him wholeheartedly. But there I was on the spot,
and I had to coordinate all this activity. Well,
they- So you had to coordinate the activity
between the CIA Air America and your own Air
Forces? I would- You know, as a result of being
there, and like Gentleman McConnell told me, use
your head, I knew that some way or another I was
going to have to do this, at least keep General
Mulmire informed. Well, this was impossible.
Why? Because of the CIA. The ambassador wouldn't
give you any, he wouldn't tell you anything about
Aram or what their mission was? No, and he didn't
have any responsibility or instructions to do it.
Oh, I knew about Aram. He finally granted me
authority just by sheer rapport that I developed
with him. He finally granted me authority to
maintain relations and actually cleared me to sit
in his control center at Air America where I knew
about the operations of all the helicopters. At
Udorn. At Udorn, yeah. And I had access to it. It
turned out to be not a real great problem up in the
area with respect to Air America because there
were nothing more but supply missions. Is that
what they were doing? Yeah, carrying supplies to
the General Mao and his forces that were fighting
the North Vietnamese in the path of Laos. really
supply missions, really what they were. By
helicopter. By helicopter. And a few transport
aircraft, like C-123s. But when we got into the-
From Udorn. From Udorn. But when we got into the
operations of some of the T-26 type aircraft,
which had a tactical capability to drop bombs, and
this was a Laotian Air Force, maybe let's say 15 or
20 T-26s, to coordinate their activities, along
the Ho Chi Minh Trail in Laos. And their objective,
of course, was the same as our Seventh Air Force,
was to stop supplies down the trail and fight the
insurrectness in Laos. So we had to help, but the
idea when you get airplanes in the air and they
begin to show up on your blips and your radar and
your air defense system, you've got to know where
they are and who they are, or you're going to get in
trouble and shoot your own airplanes down. So this
is where you had to actually do some coordination,
particularly when we got the special forces, and
this again, now this was under me and General
Beaumont, our 7th Air Force, a B-26 type airplane,
an old B-26, which was propeller driven twin
engine and could carry some bombs and some
helicopters, the big heavy helicopters, the
H-53, special forces assigned over in the
Konvenom and built up that force really in support
of Ambassador Sullivan's forces and objectives
and requirements in Laos, but here it's based in
the Konvenom in Tuckland. Well, now this is really
where it got difficult and sticky between General
Mulmire commanding the Air Forces and in
Southeast Asia, the Air Commander, and
Ambassador Sullivan, if you will, CIA, or black
forces, as we called them, operating. And this
required a lot of refereeing and arbitration and
on-the-spot saving and appealing and so forth.
But these little forces... The Air America? No,
this was not Air America. This were units on the
United States Air Forces assigned to the 13th Air
Force, just like the F-105. Now, wait a minute. I'm
a little confused. I can imagine. I can imagine.
Sullivan had Air American forces under his
control. He had Air America Company. Okay. Yeah.
Which had their... Which is CIA. Under his
control. And basically, they were flying from
Udorn, your base, into Laos to support the Royal
Laotian forces. Supply. Drop supplies to them.
Drop supplies to them. Not combat missions,
though. Not combat. Not combat. Resupply.
Resupply. Resupply only. Of course, the problem
was, is because the Air Force wanted some control
over that situation, and Sullivan didn't want to
give up any of that control. And that's where you
come in. That's right. Okay. Now, and the reason it
was a problem. And then you brought, okay, go
ahead. And the reason it was a problem is because
CIA, the nature of it, had to be secret. Sure.
strictly a need to know here I was right on the spot
and finally they let me in on the operation
although it was very widely known you know seen by
people and knew something going on sure but on the
other hand General Momar having his mission in
writing having his mission to control all air well
the resupply thing didn't cause such a problem but
it's when okay now we're getting in a new phase and
this is when fighter planes were introduced in Air
America. Is that true? Explain. Not Air America.
Okay, explain this. Now, in the confinam, well,
let me start back again. Now, I said that Air
America, American civilian pilot, you know, flew
helicopters up. They also resupplied some bombs
for the T-26s in the Laotian Air Force. Oh, okay. So
they were also flying some bombs up there? For the
Laotians. As measly as it was, 12 to 15 little T-26s
and maybe 250 pound bombs, they were trying to, you
know, and we had a mag for Laos also, you know. So
they were trying to give them the capability to
fight the North Vietnamese and support General
Mao in his jungle warfare. Now, to expand that
capability, expand that capability, this was
done at a much higher in Southeast Asia, probably
at presidential level and CIA level,
some T-26s and some B-26s were assigned to this
special warfare force unit at Mekong Phnom, a base
we built up right on the Mekong River in extreme
eastern Thailand. These are air force special
forces? Air forces. Special Forces assigned to
7th Air Force and supported by 13th Air Force. And
manned by United States Air Force people. And
their function, of course, was to bomb the Ho Chi
Minh Trail. I know for a fact, Ambassador
Graham... In Laos. Ho Chi Minh Trail in Laos. Yeah,
well, the Ho Chi Minh Trail was in Laos. I know for a
fact, Ambassador Graham Martin was instrumental
in getting these horses signed. He wanted them in
Thailand, and in a way, you might say he was
supporting Ambassador Sullivan, because you
know, Ambassador Martin also had a CIA man on his
staff. And of course, CIA man on his staff was
always wanting to have the CIA man on Sullivan's It
gets complicated, I know. But at any rate, we got
the forces. Well, of course, their mission was to
operate in Laos. Okay, who thinks he's the boss in
Laos? Ambassador Sullivan. Who thinks he's the
boss for air operations over Laos, part of the
Southeast Asian Theater? General Mollmeyer.
Both of them are right. Who's the referee? Charlie
Bond. Who uses his head? Charlie Bond, that
General McConnell director. Who understands
Charlie Bond's position? General Mollmeyer. 7th
Air Force, General Wilson, 13th Air Force,
General Stilwell, McTighe, Ambassador Martin,
and Ambassador Sullivan. But who gives a damn
about his problem? None of them. They're only
interested in theirs. Sure. So, it was, but it was
interesting. There's never dull moment. Okay,
how did you resolve this problem of of the Ho Chi
Minh Trail and the fighter pilots, Ho Chi Minh
Trail models. Okay.
Visits to General Momar and discussion with him
finally got him and Ambassador Sullivan together
and- They actually met face to face? Oh yeah, oh
yeah. At Udorn? Yeah. And actually one time I got
Spike a visit up to Vientiane. He visited the
embassy. We're right in Vientiane. Very few
people were permitted to go into Laos. Oh, yeah.
But it was fine and settled where General
Mollmeyer's headquarters fragged these special
forces based on the con phenomenon. What do you
mean, fragged them? They gave them operational
orders as to when to take off and where to drop bombs
or look for the enemy, mostly along the Ho Chi Minh
Trail. In other words, General Mollmeyer was
satisfied. He was controlling them. General
Ambassador Sullivan was satisfied. He was having
action done against the, committed against the
enemy, if you will, the common enemy in Laos. Now,
whenever, there was another problem. In a lot of
ways. How effective was this against Laos?
Surprisingly, it was very effective. And it was
because of the particular types of pilots and
people that commanded that particular unit.
Colonel Jaime Aderholt was absolutely superior
in his duties and functions and capability as a
special forces commander. He personally
sometimes saw the airplanes. And those boys
operated night in propeller-driven airplanes
and bombed at night, of course, moonlight night.
And they were fairly effective. They killed
trucks, to use our expression over there. They
killed trucks on the ultimate draft. Of course,
one as effective as our gunship operation later
on, where they're hard looking at the red with
their side-shooting guns.
Okay, so we resolved that problem. Now let's add
other communication and coordination problems.
Another problem, which was in a lot of ways,
definitely one way politically was much more
important, was there was only certain targets.
that we could bomb in Laos. And these targets were
to be specified and picked out and approved by
Ambassador Sutton.